# Project Log

## October 2013


### Monday 7th

I've organised a meeting with Ian Nabney for Thursday 10th 10:30am in
MB216A. Topics for discussion:

* Dataset – getting a better understanding of the data which I will be working
with, the scientific background behind it, how often it will be updated, whether
it is confidential/open source etc.

* Users – what is the expected userbase, what are their expectations, concerns,
and technical experience? Etc.

* Time schedule – should I be using any development processes? How often should
I be meeting/reporting back? Etc.

* Difference(s) between the protein diffusion coefficient projects.

* Additional project requirements – what is the expected site traffic? High or
low? Do I need to organise dedicated servers?

* Any existing related databases to use as reference.

* Any confidentiality/plagiarism issues with hosting WIP code on github
(effectively open sourcing the whole project)?


### Wednesday 9th

Some personal goals for the project:

* To produce something of value to the molecular biology community.

* To exclusively use open source (free as in freedom and free as in free beer)
software and tools, without exception.

* To learn more about web development.

* To get a high mark ($> 70\%$) mark for all assessments.

* To contribute back to at least one of the tools that I use in some
quantifiable way.


### Thursday 10th

Met with Ian. Notes:

* Choice of process is important - look up RUP (IBM Rational Unified Process)
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_Rational_Unified_Process) and consider using
it. If not, suggest an improved alternative and justify.

* Choice of language is personal preference. Ian has experience with PHP making
it a solid choice – but a justified alternative is acceptable.

* I should meet with Dr. Darren Flower (Aston lecturer, effectively product
owner for this project) ASAP to discuss the project, and he can give me the data
and help answer questions about it.

* I can use github.com to host code, but shouldn’t upload the bio data itself.

* First term work is for a lot more than just planning stage. I should be using
it to begin work properly and use it to brush up on MySQL/PHP skills as
required.

* Weekly meetings are essential, 10:30 on Thursdays.

**TODO:**
1. Read up on RUP.

2. Contact Darren to arrange meeting.

3. Read about git and MySQL
(http://ben.kulbertis.org/2011/10/synchronizing-a-mysql-database-with-git-and-git-hooks/).

**Unified Process**

The Unified Software Development Process is an iterative and incremental
software development process framework. The basis of the process is that it is a
use case driven iterative and incremental process, in which Elaboration,
Construction and Transition are divided into a series of time boxed phases and
iterated upo

**IBM Rational Unified Process**

An iterative software development process framework created by IBM (Rational
Software Corporation division), which is an implementation of the Unified
Process. It details six best practises for modern software engineering:

1. Develop iteratively, with risk as the primary iteration driver

2. Manage requirements

3. Employ a component-based architecture

4. Model software visually

5. Continuously verify quality

6. Control changes

Each iteration contains nine disciplines. Six engineering disciplines:

1. Business modelling

2. Requirements

3. Analysis and Design

4. Implementation

5. Test

6. Deployment

And three supporting disciplines:

1. Configuration and change management

2. Project management

3. Environment

The RUP project life cycle consists of four phases:

1. Inception phase

2. Elaboration phase

3. Construction phase

4. Transition phase

**Problems with RUP**

It is isn’t open source. A user license for the Rational Method Composer must be
bought from IBM for $1,080.00 dollars, and so I must look for alternatively so
as not to violate my personal goal of using purely open source tools/frameworks.

**OpenUP**

The Open Unified Process, alternatively known as the Eclipse Process Framework
(EPF). This offers an open source minimalist implementation of RUP.

> OpenUP is a lean Unified Process that applies iterative and incremental
> approaches within a structured life-cycle. OpenUP embraces a pragmatic, agile
> philosophy that focuses on the collaborative nature of software
> development. It is a tools-agnostic, low-ceremony process that can be extended
> to address a broad variety of project types.

Arranged meeting with Darren for 2pm in MB449 tomorrow.
